Documentation - Intro (#62)
cardano-scaling/alba: README.md

# ALBA

> This is the rust library of _Approximate Lower Bound Arguments_ proposed in the [paper](https://iohk.io/en/research/library/papers/approximate-lower-bound-arguments/), May 2024, Eurocrypt'24 by _Pyrros Chaidos, Prof Aggelos Kiayias, Leonid Reyzin, Anatoliy Zinovyev_.

Reviewer: rust --> Rust

### Introduction

> ALBA enables a prover who has a large collection of data to convince a verifier that their set includes at least a minimum number of items that meet a specific condition, called a predicate, even though the prover only reveals a subset of the data. By approximating a lower bound on the prover's knowledge, ALBA makes use of a controlled gap between the size of prover's actual knowledge and the threshold of the verifier checks they know. This design results in highly efficient proofs, achieving nearly optimal proof sizes in both non-interactive and distributed environments. ALBA's primary applications include large-scale decentralized signature schemes. It is particularly well-suited for decentralized or blockchain scenarios, where it enhances communication efficiency among multiple provers sharing evidence.

Reviewer: It will be great if after this general opening paragraph we show a specific example of how Alba will be used - e.g., one of the voting examples (or some other suitable example) - demonstrating very specifically what the above-mentioned parameters are.

# ALBA

> This is the Rust library of _Approximate Lower Bound Arguments_ proposed in the [paper](https://iohk.io/en/research/library/papers/approximate-lower-bound-arguments/), May 2024, Eurocrypt'24 by _Pyrros Chaidos, Prof Aggelos Kiayias, Leonid Reyzin, Anatoliy Zinovyev_.

Author: No _prof_ is better :)

### Introduction
ALBA enables a prover who has a large collection of data to convince a verifier that their set includes at least a minimum number of items that meet a specific condition, called a predicate, even though the prover only reveals a subset of the data. By approximating a lower bound on the prover's knowledge, ALBA makes use of a controlled gap between the size of prover's actual knowledge and the threshold of the verifier checks they know. This design results in highly efficient proofs, achieving nearly optimal proof sizes in both non-interactive and distributed environments. ALBA's primary applications include large-scale decentralized signature schemes. It is particularly well-suited for decentralized or blockchain scenarios, where it enhances communication efficiency among multiple provers sharing witness.

> In a decentralized voting system, participants (voters) submit votes that support different options or candidates. To validate the results without revealing individual votes, an ALBA protocol could be used. Each voter's choice can be considered an _element_ that meets a certain predicate (e.g., a valid vote for a candidate). Instead of tallying every vote publicly, ALBA allows an aggregator (like an election authority) to generate a compact proof showing that a sufficient number of valid votes has been cast for each candidate to meet the required threshold for a decision (such as reaching a quorum or winning a majority). This approach keeps individual votes private while enabling quick, efficient validation of the voting outcome, making it particularly useful for secure, private, and scalable voting systems where privacy and efficiency are critical.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In a decentralized voting system, participants (voters) submit votes that support different options or candidates. To validate the results without revealing all individual votes, an ALBA protocol could be used. Each voter's choice can be considered an _element_ that meets a certain predicate (e.g., a valid vote for a candidate). Instead of tallying every vote publicly, ALBA allows an aggregator (like an election authority) to generate a compact proof showing that a sufficient number of valid votes has been cast for each candidate to meet the required threshold for a decision (such as reaching a quorum or winning a majority). Combining ALBA with zero-knowledge technology such as zkSNARKs, we can efficiently keep individual votes private while enabling quick, efficient validation of the voting outcome, making it particularly useful for secure, private, and scalable voting systems where privacy and efficiency are critical.
```

> The paper introduces various ALBA protocol constructions tailored to different needs. The basic construction enables a prover to show possession of a large set by creating a proof sequence of elements that meet staged hash-based conditions, efficiently excluding small sets. _Pre-hashing_ improves this by precomputing hashes to group elements into _bins_, reducing computation and enhancing performance, especially with large sets. For smaller sets, the generalized Telescope scheme allows multiple attempts to form a proof, adjusting parameters to maintain efficiency across sizes. Decentralized versions of ALBA include the _Simple Lottery Construction_, where each party holding an element decides to share it based on a random _lottery_ mechanism, with an aggregator forming the proof from a target number of shared elements. The _Decentralized Telescope_ adapts the Telescope scheme for multiple parties, who individually apply it and share qualifying elements with an aggregator. Finally, the weighted extension supports elements with integer weights, allowing the prover to meet a total weight threshold, making ALBA versatile for contexts where elements have varying significance.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The paper introduces various ALBA protocol constructions tailored to different needs. The basic construction allows a prover to show possession of a large set by creating a proof sequence of elements that meet staged hash-based conditions, efficiently excluding small sets. _Pre-hashing_ improves this by precomputing hashes to group elements into _bins_, reducing computation and enhancing performance, especially with large sets. For smaller sets, the generalized Telescope scheme allows multiple attempts to form a proof, adjusting parameters to maintain efficiency across sizes. Decentralized versions of ALBA include the _Simple Lottery Construction_, where each party holding an element decides to share it based on a random _lottery_ mechanism, with an aggregator forming the proof from a target number of shared elements. The _Decentralized Telescope_ adapts the Telescope scheme for multiple parties, who individually apply it and share qualifying elements with an aggregator. Finally, the weighted extension supports elements with integer weights, allowing the prover to meet a total weight threshold, making ALBA versatile for contexts where elements have varying significance.
```

> The library covers the following constructions of the ALBA protocol:

Reviewer: Maybe also summarize in one sentence what each one of these are

# ALBA
This is a Rust library of _Approximate Lower Bound Arguments_ proposed in the [paper](https://iohk.io/en/research/library/papers/approximate-lower-bound-arguments/), May 2024, Eurocrypt'24 by _Pyrros Chaidos, Aggelos Kiayias, Leonid Reyzin, Anatoliy Zinovyev_.

### Introduction
ALBA enables a prover who has a large collection of data to convince a verifier that their set includes at least a minimum number of elements that meet a specific condition, called a predicate, even though the prover only reveals a subset of the data.

> By approximating a lower bound on the prover's knowledge, ALBA makes use of a controlled gap between the size of prover's actual knowledge and the threshold of the verifier checks they know.

Reviewer 3: This sentence sounds confusing. Here, it says "ALBA makes use of a controlled gap" and the way it does it is "by approximating a lower bound on the prover's knowledge". I think it doesn't make sense logically.

My mild suggestion for the introduction:
1) stating that alba efficiently proves knowledge of elements
2) saying that there is a requirement: gap between what prover knows and what verifier is convinced
3) saying that this why it is called "approximate lower bound"
4) saying that this gap is reason why the prover algorithm can be very efficient

> This design results in highly efficient proofs, achieving nearly optimal proof sizes in both non-interactive and distributed environments.

Reviewer 3: The proof sizes are not really optimal, definitely not compared to SNARKs. They are only optimal in special models like when there is a weight oracle that cannot be encoded in a circuit (e.g. a human judge). The main advantage of alba is fast proving times, especially compared to SNARKs.

Suggest replacing "optimal" with "small" and emphasizing that the prover and verifier are very fast.

ALBA's primary applications include large-scale decentralized signature schemes.
It is particularly well-suited for decentralized or blockchain scenarios, where it enhances communication efficiency among multiple provers sharing witness.

> In a decentralized voting system, participants (voters) submit votes that support different options or candidates.

Reviewer 3: Perhaps, you could make it more clear that this is just one application, and that ALBA has many other use-cases.

To validate the results without revealing all individual votes, an ALBA protocol could be used.
Each voter's choice can be considered an _element_ that meets a certain predicate (e.g., a valid vote for a candidate).
Instead of tallying every vote publicly, ALBA allows an aggregator (like an election authority) to generate a compact proof showing that a sufficient number of valid votes has been cast for each candidate to meet the required threshold for a decision (such as reaching a quorum or winning a majority).
Combining ALBA with zero-knowledge technology such as _zkSNARKs_, we can efficiently keep individual votes private while enabling quick, efficient validation of the voting outcome, making it particularly useful for secure, private, and scalable voting systems where privacy and efficiency are critical.

> The paper introduces various ALBA protocol constructions tailored to different needs.

Reviewer 3: This doesn't make sense imo. You say that there are multiple constructions "tailored to different needs", but then you talk about the basic construction and the construction with prehashing. Both are not superior in any way to the (third) bounded DFS construction, so they do not serve any special needs. The decentralized and weighted variants do, however.

_Pre-hashing_ improves this by precomputing hashes to group elements into _bins_, reducing computation and enhancing performance, especially with large sets.
For smaller sets, the generalized Telescope scheme allows multiple attempts to form a proof, adjusting parameters to maintain efficiency across sizes.
Decentralized versions of ALBA include the _Simple Lottery Construction_, where each party holding an element decides to share it based on a random _lottery_ mechanism, with an aggregator forming the proof from a target number of shared elements.
The _Decentralized Telescope_ adapts the Telescope scheme for multiple parties, who individually apply it and share qualifying elements with an aggregator.
Finally, the weighted extension supports elements with integer weights, allowing the prover to meet a total weight threshold, making ALBA versatile for contexts where elements have varying significance.

The library covers the following constructions of the ALBA protocol:
1. Centralized Telescope
2. Simple Lottery Construction
3. Decentralized Telescope

> 4. Wighted-Decentralized Telescope

Author: Weighted Centralized

### Disclaimer

> > This code is NOT fit for production, it's not been optimised, thoroughly tested, nor audited by competent cryptographers.

Reviewer 3: nit: we could add a warning emoji in the spirit of the next section

> Its one and only purpose is to help people who are more familiar with code than equations to prototype larger protocols using ALBA.

### Documentation
👉 We deliver comprehensive [documentation][crate::docs] aimed at connecting theory with practical implementation.

👉 Checkout website on this [link](https://alba.cardano-scaling.org).

### Compiling the library
Compile the library:
```shell
cargo build --release
```

### Tests and Benchmarks

> Run tests with `cargo test`. Run benchmarks with `cargo bench`. 

Reviewer 3: perhaps we should add a command that compiles the documentation?
`cargo doc --no-deps --open`

The *Telescope* construction allows the prover to build a sequence of elements that satisfy staged hash-based conditions.
This process efficiently filters relevant elements, narrowing down the data to subsets that meet the required criteria.
By introducing bounded repetitions and constraints such as pre-hashing on the prover's search, the construction ensures scalability and efficiency for large datasets.

The *Lottery* construction offers a decentralized approach where participants probabilistically decide whether to share their elements with an aggregator. 
The aggregator collects enough elements and concatenates them to generate a proof. 
This method is inherently decentralized and can also handle weighted scenarios by incorporating element weights into the lottery process.

Using these constructions, the library supports eight ALBA schemes, covering a wide range of configurations:
- _Telescope bounded_ (Section 3.2.2), whether centralized or not (Section 4.2), unweighted or not (Section 5),
- _Lottery_ (Section 4.1), whether centralized or not, unweighted or not (Section 5).

## ⚠️ Disclaimer

> This code is NOT fit for production, it has not been optimised, thoroughly tested, nor audited.

Reviewer: optimised ==> optimized
